I mentioned earlier that we were going to add delete
capabilities to the product controller by using a proper
test-driven development methodology.
This means that we're going to write test methods first,
validate that the test methods fail,
and then implement the delete method inside the product controller,
using our test harness to prove that our implementation is correct.
When implementing the delete operation,
we expect the product controller to first see if the product exists,
and if it does, delete it.
There are three primary scenarios that we want to test.
First we want to test a successful deletion.
In this case,
the test case will attempt to perform a deletion of a
product that exists in the service.
The product controller should first attempt to find
the product with the specified ID,
so we'll mock the product service's findById method to return a valid product.
The product service already has a delete method that returns true if
the deletion is successful or false if it's not.
So we'll use the mockProduct service bean to return
true when its delete method is called.
Finally, we'll validate that we receive a 200 OK HTTP response code.
Next,
we want to handle the case when an attempt is made to
delete a product that does not exist.
In this case,
we'll mock the product service's findById method to return an optional empty,
and then we'll validate that we receive a 404 Not Found response.
Finally, we want to test the scenario when the delete database operation fails.
So we'll mock the product service's findById method to return a valid product,
but we'll mock the delete method to return false,
then we'll validate that we receive a 500 internal
server error HTTP response code.
Let's dive into the code.
First we're going to implement our deletion tests,
then we're going to validate that our tests fail.
Next, we're going to implement the delete operation in the product controller,
and finally,
we're going to validate that our tests pass and that our new
delete operation is implemented correctly.
We have three new tests: TestProductDeleteSuccess tests a successful deletion,
testProductDeleteNotFound tests a deletion attempt
for a product that does not exist,
and testProductDeleteFailure tests a deletion attempt
that fails at the database level.
The testProductDeleteSuccess method first creates a mockProduct that will be
returned by the mockProduct service's findById method.
It then configures the mockProduct service.
It returns an Optional of our mockProduct when the product
service's findById method is called with an ID of 1,
and then it returns true when the product service's
delete method is called on an ID of 1.
Next it invokes mockMvc's perform method,
passing in a delete RequestBuilder with a urlTemplate
referencing the path /product/1,
and then it validates that we receive a 200 OK HTTP response code.
The testProductDeleteNotFound method configures the MockProduct service to
return an Optional.empty when its findById 1 method is called,
and then validates that we receive a 404 NotFound HTTP response code.
Finally,
the testProductDeleteFailure method configures the mockProduct service to
return a mockProduct when its findById method is called,
but then to return false when its delete method is called.
We perform the delete request and validate that we receive a
500 InternalServerError HTTP response code.
Let's run these tests and see what we get.
As you can see, the three DELETE test cases all fail.
If we scroll down in the console output,
we can see that instead of receiving our 200,
404, and 500 response codes,
we instead receive a 405 HTTP response code and a message that
indicates that the Request method DELETE is not supported.
Now let's implement the delete operation in the ProductController.
The deleteProduct method is annotated with the DeleteMapping
annotation and handles the /product/id URI path.
It first attempts to retrieve the product with the
specified ID from the product service.
If it's found, then it calls the productService's delete method.
If the delete method returns true, then it returns a 200 OK ResponseEntity.
If it returns false, then it returns a 500 INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR ResponseEntity.
Finally, if the product is not found,
then it returns a 404 NotFound ResponseEntity.
With this method implemented, let's rerun our tests and see how they do.
As you can see, all ProductController tests now pass.
This is the power of test-driven development.
We wrote tests that validate the behavior that we expect,
and then we wrote the code to implement that behavior. If we made a mistake when writing our code, our test would've found it for us.